# Versioning and release processes

## Versioning Process

All packages in the `cardano-base` repository follow the [PVP versioning
scheme](https://pvp.haskell.org/).

Updating the version for every package in this repository is the responsibility of the
developer that is introducing a change to any package that is subject to release
process. Version must be updated in both the `CHANGELOG.md` and in the `.cabal` file for
the package in the same PR, as well as every other package that is affected by the change
in the repository. Every affected package that is subject to release process must receive
a lower and, potentially, an upper bound update on the dependency that has experienced the
change.

For example if I add a function to `cardano-binary` and use it in
`cardano-strict-containers`, then I must add a minor version bump to `cardano-binary` and
I also must add a lower version restriction in `cardano-strict-containers` for
`cardano-binary`, as per PVP.

In other words, when it comes to versioning, the fact that all of the packages in this
repository are built together at the same time should be ignored. It should be assumed
that every package and all of its required dependencies can be released to CHaPs at any
point in time. This is necessary to guarantee that if such a package is compatible with
other packages from this repository, which have been previously released, the version
bounds should reflect that.

### Upper bounds

Normally, [upper bounds are required by
PVP](https://pvp.haskell.org/#dependencies-in-cabal) for all dependencies of a
package. This is the only exception we make to the PVP, and we do not require strict upper
bounds for dependencies that come from Hackage. For example, there is no need to add an
upper bound on `containers` package, unless there is a known incompatibility. Speculative
upper bounds over time lead to overly restrictive build plans that are forced to favor
older packages. Moreover, they lead to a lot of redundant maintenance burden.

### Lower bounds

Placing lower bounds is a lot less controversial than upper bounds, because they don't
suffer from speculation about the future. Older versions of dependencies are known at
release time. Therefore lower bounds must be added for all dependencies that are known to
be incompatible with the package.

### Handbook

See the [versioning section](https://github.com/input-output-hk/cardano-engineering-handbook/blob/main/policy/haskell/packaging/versioning.md)
of the Cardano Engineering Handbook for more detailed information on this topic.

### `CHANGELOG.md`

Every package, that [is subject to the release
process](packages-excluded-from-release-process), will always have the top most entry in
the `CHANGELOG.md` set to an unreleased version. That top most section will have either
the patch, minor or the major versions bumped, but not all three, when compared to the
latest released version. Which one it will be depends on the recent changes that were
added after the latest release was made. More on why this should always be true is in the
[Release Process](#release-process) section. For instance, if the latest version of
`cardano-crypto-class` that was released to CHaPs is `2.1.1.0`, then there will be a
section like this which will have a version that is strictly higher than `2.1.1.1`, eg:

```
# Version history for `cardano-crypto-class`

## 2.1.1.1

* Add ...
...
```

It is quite common to experience conflicts in the changelog, since that will be the most
common section of the codebase being updated at the same time. When it comes to conflicts
resolution, it is pretty easy:

* on the package version, the highest value should usually win.
* on the change log entries, all entries should usually survive.

There is no enforced order in which changelog entries should be added to the file. It is
irrelevant where entries are added to the top, to the bottom or in the middle of the
section. In fact, randomized insertion reduces conflicts, so feel free to add entries
anywhere in the section. Most important is that we can always infer the actual order from
the linear git history, which provides us with a reliable source of order on changes.

#### When to update

`CHANGELOG.md` must be updated for the package that is experiencing a change and any other
package in the repository that re-exports that change in one form or another. In general
an entry is added according to these rules:

* Every breaking change MUST appear in the `CHANGELOG.md`.

* Every non-breaking change SHOULD appear in the `CHANGELOG.md`

* Every change that does not affect the user facing semantics of the code (eg. changes to
  documentation, dependency bounds, test suites, addition of internal functions,
  performance improvements, etc.)  COULD be added to the `CHANGELOG.md`, but they are
  discouraged. Exceptions should be made for changes that could really be valuable to the
  downstream user.

* Every change to a public sub-library of a package must be added to a separate section in
  the `CHANGELOG.md` and is versioned together with the main library. Eg. `testlib`:

  ```
  # Version history for `cardano-crypto-class`

  ## 2.20.1.0

  * Add `someFunction`

  ### `testlib`

  * Add `Arbitrary` instance for ...
  ...
  ```

## Release Process

Usually a package release will happen directly from the `master` branch. Current release
process even allows for a release to happen from a commit that is slightly behind `HEAD`
of the `master` branch. On a rare occasion when a bugfix needs to be backported to an
older version, a release can happen from an ephemeral release branch. Such a release
branch must follow the same procedure of a PR review and CI, that is why it should be
prefixed with `release/some-branch-name`, because that will ensure that CI is triggered.

### Release Steps

Here are the steps for a release engineer to follow.

#### Decide what to release

Normally it should be OK to release at the same time all of the packages from the
repository that have experienced some sort of change, but that is not mandatory. It is
fine to release any package by itself at any point from the `HEAD` of `master` or even a
commit that is behind the `HEAD` on the `master` branch. A release from an ephemeral
branch is also possible, but it is paramount to ensure that all of the same changes will
be present in the next release from `master` branch.

The most common case is to blindly release all of the packages that were changed since
they were last released. This begs a question. How to decide which of the packages have
changed, thus deserve a release?

The rule is very simple. Every package that falls under this release process and has a
version in its cabal file higher than the highest version released to CHaPs is allowed to
be released. It is also possible to rely on git tags for deriving information about the
latest released version of a package, because it is a mandatory step after the release to
CHaP. (TODO: implement a script that lists all of the package that fit the above criteria)

#### Release to CHaP

1. Follow the [CHaP release
   instructions](https://github.com/intersectmbo/cardano-haskell-packages#-from-github)

   For example:

   ```shell
   $ ./scripts/add-from-github.sh https://github.com/intersectmbo/cardano-base deadbeef libs/cardano-crypto-class ...
   ```
   It is important to supply a commit SHA instead of a branch name.

2. Create and merge a PR to https://github.com/intersectmbo/cardano-haskell-packages
   with the release(s). In case that a current release causes breakage on some downstream
   package due to that package lacking upper bounds, you will require to [add a revision
   for that package](https://github.com/intersectmbo/cardano-haskell-packages#how-to-add-a-new-package-metadata-revision) that fixes the bounds in the same PR as the release. Also it is
   necessary to notify the maintainers of the package via a bug report or a PR with a fix.

3. Once the PR is merged then create a git tag with the same version for the same git SHA
   that was released, eg:

   ```
   $ git tag cardano-crypto-class-2.20.1.1 deadbeef...
   $ git push tag cardano-crypto-class-2.20.1.1
   ```

4. Create a PR to `master` that updates `CHANGELOG.md` files for all of the packages that
   have just been released. The only addition to the file should be a markdown header
   section with the next patch version bumped, which must bring the `CHANGELOG.md` to the
   state of the top level section containing a version higher than the highest one ever
   released. Due to concurrent nature of editing the repository it is possible that
   `CHANGELOG.md` have already received a version bump with a section that fits the
   higher version criteria, in which case nothing needs to be added. The body of the
   section, if added, must be empty with just one single asterisk `*`.

   For example, if `cardano-crypto-class-2.20.1.1` was just released, then a new empty
   `2.20.1.2` section in the `CHANGELOG.md` must be added:

   ```markdown
   # Version history for `cardano-crypto-class`

   ## 2.20.1.2

   *

   ## 2.20.1.1

   ...
   ```

   It is important to note that the version in the cabal file should *not* be changed at
   this stage, because it will later be used for deciding which package have changed and
   can be released.

#### Backporting changes

It is occasionally necessary to release a minor version for a package that has its history
diverged from a version on `master` significantly enough to make it impossible for a minor
version to be released from `master`. In other words a patch backporting. In such a
scenario a few steps should be followed:

1. Two ephemeral branches with a prefix `release/` need to be created from a git tag of a
   package version that is being updated. For example if a current version on `master` is
   `cardano-binary-1.13.10.0` then the latest released `cardano-binary-1.12.x` should be
   used as base, eg:

   ```shell
   $ git checkout -b release/cardano-binary-1.12.6.2 cardano-binary-1.12.6.2
   $ git push -u origin release/cardano-binary-1.12.6.2
   $ git checkout -b release/cardano-binary-1.12.7.0 cardano-binary-1.12.6.2
   ```

   We'll need the first branch in order to use it as base when creating a PR for code
   review.

2. Changes that need to be released should be `cherry-pick`ed from master. If a fix on
   `master` was implemented in some incompatible fashion to the current release, then it
   is fine to reimplement it anew, as long as the change being introduced is also present
   on master in some form. That requirement also concerns the changelog entry, it should
   be present in both the patched version and in the next version released from `master`.

3. Regular release process should follow from here, except when PR is created it will not
   be `master` that is used as a base branch, but the one created in 1st step.

4. Once the package has been released and a git tag for that release was created, both of
   the `release/` branches can be removed.

This process does not accommodate backporting fixes to versions that are at least two major
versions behind the one on `master`.

## Packages excluded from release process

Currently there are no such packages that fit the criteria below, but this could change in
the future.

We release all of the packages in this repo to [CHaP (Cardano Haskell
Packages)](https://github.com/intersectmbo/cardano-haskell-packages). However, packages
can be added to the repo that are either used for testing, debugging or benchmarking and
do not deserve to be released into the World. They will neither be released nor
versioned. Bounds on the local dependencies do not need to be updated for such packages,
because they will always use the versions for dependencies from within the repository,
rather than from CHaPs.

## Test packages

Here are test suite packages that are still subject to the versioning and release process,
but do not require changelog updates:

* `cardano-crypto-tests`

It is mostly used internally and is planned to be deprecated and removed in some distant
future in favor of a public sublibrary `testlib` for each relevant package.
